From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Ketroof. This is the Daily.
[Music]
On Wednesday morning, after a 7-week
trial whose every turn has grabbed
headlines, a jury found Shawn Combmes,
the music mogul known as Diddy, not
guilty of the most serious charges
against him.
Today I speak with Ben Cesario about why
the prosecution's case fell short at
trial and Jodie Caner on what the
verdict may tell us about how
prosecutors and juries see sexual abuse
cases.
[Applause]
[Music]
It's Thursday, July 3rd.
Ben, hi. Thank you for being here. Are
you outside the courthouse right now?
Yeah, I'm right around the corner from
the federal courthouse downtown. Okay.
Well, we'll try not to take up too much
of your time, but very happy to have you
here. As we know, since we did an
episode on this with you last week,
Diddy has been on trial for the last two
months or so, facing sex trafficking and
racketeering charges. These are
accusations that centered on the
argument that he had coerced two
ex-girlfriends into repeated sex
sessions with multiple men. The jury
started its deliberations on Monday, and
you were at the courthouse today when
the verdict was announced. So tell me
how it unfolded. Well, it started like
most mornings where there's a long line
of people to get into the courthouse.
There's all the reporters, but then
there's influencers and just members of
the public who have been showing up
every day at this point after 2 months.
You know, I recognize a lot of them and
we say good morning to each other. And
we head inside the court building. There
was a real sense of tension about this
because we've all been waiting for the
verdict for two months now. But the
other thing is that on Tuesday, the jury
told the judge that they had reached a
verdict on four of the five counts
against Shawn Combmes, but they were
still deadlocked on the fifth one, which
is the racketeering conspiracy charge.
Since they said that, I think everybody
has been trying to game out in their
minds how this day might go. So, what
happened when things started today? It
started off pretty normal. The jury was
deliberating and then a little later in
the morning, a note was delivered and
word got around that the jury had
reached a verdict. So, Shawn Combmes
comes in. He's accompanied by the US
Marshalss who have brought him in every
day of the trial. Uh, and he gets to his
seat, looks to his family who are seated
right in the front of the public
gallery, and he mouths to them, "We got
this," and he has a copy with him of the
11th Psalm, which is the one that
begins, "In the Lord, I take refuge."
It's about putting your trust in God.
The jury comes in, and the four person
is called on by the judge to read their
verdict. And the first count that's read
is racketeering conspiracy. This is one
of the most serious charges he was
facing. It carries a potential life
sentence. It's also one of the trickiest
ones for the government to prove. It's
very complicated law. And the verdict
was not guilty. And you could see the
release on Shawn Cones. Um the the
feeling of relief that he has been found
not guilty of this very serious charge.
It's a big moment. Big moment. Very
dramatic moment in the courtroom. And
then they get to the second count, which
is sex trafficking of Cassie. Cassie,
his ex-girlfriend. Cassie, his
ex-girlfriend, who got this entire thing
started when she filed a lawsuit against
him a year and a half ago. And she was
definitely the star witness in the
trial. She was on the stand for four
days giving pretty grueling testimony
about her experience with Combmes. But
the jury found that Shawn Combmes was
not guilty of sex trafficking of her.
So, two wins right off the bat for him.
The next count that they read was
transportation to engage in prostitution
related to Cassy's story. This is also
known as the Man Act. It's a law that
says it's illegal to transport people
across state lines for the purpose of
prostitution.
And it was guilty. So now he's been
found guilty of one charge but not of
two others. Okay. What about the rest?
So the next one is sex trafficking of a
woman known as Jane. This is an
anonymous woman who was Comb's
girlfriend after Cassie. And she told in
some ways a very similar story to Cassie
about being coerced into these long sex
marathons with prostitutes but not
guilty. And the fifth and last count
that was read was another transportation
to engage in prostitution. This time
related to Jane and it was guilty for
that one. So just to sum up here, Ben,
he's found not guilty of these two
really serious charges, racketeering and
sex trafficking in the case of both of
these former girlfriends. But he is
found guilty of this lesser charge,
which is essentially hiring a sex
worker. Is that right? That's right. He
was acquitted of by far the most serious
charges, the ones that could have landed
him life in prison and that the
government had really built its entire
case around. He still was found guilty
of two counts of a federal crime, but
the sentence is a lot lower and the
crime itself is regarded as far less
serious than racketeering and sex
trafficking. The family who have been in
court almost every day and some
supporters behind them were in just
jubilation when the not-uilty verdicts
were read, cheering, clapping, holding
their arms up in the air. And it sounds
like Diddy and his team are viewing this
as a huge win just based on their
reaction. Absolutely. Short of a full
aqu quiddle, this was the best outcome
he could have hoped for. You know, the
body language from him was like utterly
different than we had seen even just a
day before when he seemed quite worried
about the way this might all play out.
And he thanked the jury as they filed
out of the room and there was just a
sort of palpable relief from him. His
lawyers were all smiling and the
prosecutors who are seated at the table
in front of them who represent the
federal government were looking straight
ahead stonefaced.
Okay. I want to walk through the two big
buckets of charges that he was found not
guilty of. First, let's talk about what
we said the last time that we talked was
always going to be the more complicated
of the two charges, which is
racketeering conspiracy. The prosecution
here, as you told us, needed to prove
that Diddy had a network of employees
who were all actively helping him commit
these crimes. Why do you think the jury
didn't buy the prosecution's argument?
Well, we can't read their minds and we
haven't heard from any of the jurors
yet, but I think that the government
maybe just didn't persuade them that
this machine that Shawn Combmes had of
assistance and bodyguards and all these
people who worked for him, even if it
was a perfectly welloiled machine, that
its purpose was committing crimes that
the employees knew. If they're
conspirators, then it means that they
knew that they were engaged in something
illegal. There was conflicting testimony
about what the assistants did know about
these sexual encounters, which were
called freakoffs at the trial, whether
they knew what was happening in the room
or they didn't know what was happening
in the room. Right. Yes. I mean, there
were these questions about whether these
were accompllices or just employees
doing a job who didn't actually know
what they were participating in
effectively.
I think that was certainly the defense's
position that the government hadn't
proved that. Um, the government argued
very strongly, but I think when it came
to the jury, they just didn't buy it.
Okay. Now, let's turn to the second
charge, which by comparison seemed more
straightforward, the sex trafficking
charge. The prosecution argued that
these two former girlfriends were
essentially forced into these freakoffs.
It seems as though the jury, though, was
more persuaded by the defense's
position, which is that the girlfriends
were willing participants in these
encounters. Is that right? either that
or that they just didn't believe beyond
a reasonable doubt that they were
coerced. Maybe they bought the defense's
position fully. Maybe they just didn't
feel persuaded by the story that the
government told that these women were
coerced even just in certain instances
over the course of the long
relationships that Holmes had with these
women. He was with Cassie for over a
decade and the government actually said,
"We're not arguing that every single
time they did this, it was coerced, but
we are saying that it happened
sometimes." And they pointed to a few
particular episodes of that. And just to
remind folks who may not have been
following this as closely as you were,
the jury was adjudicating that question
of were they coerced into this or not
based on a huge body of text messages,
right, that these women had with Diddy
that was presented at trial. Well, there
was also testimony from the two women
who had the longest time on the stand of
any witness. Cassie was on the stand for
4 days. Jane was on the stand for six
days and they told very gripping,
upsetting stories about the things that
had happened in their relationship, but
the defense's strategy was to undermine
them with those text messages. And there
were hundreds of them that they
presented at court where they would make
flirtatious comments to combs where they
would get involved with the planning and
even the choosing of which male escorts
were going to be invited. And I think
that that really complicated the story
that the government was trying to tell.
And that may have been the reason that
the jury found him not guilty. The
government's response was that these
women were telling Diddy what he wanted
to hear, right? That they were in a
scenario in which they felt they had to
say they were happy about this, but they
weren't really. I mean, the women said
that themselves. They said a lot of
times I was only saying this because I
knew that's what he wanted and if I
didn't give it to him he would get it
somehow or I would suffer or I was
afraid that he would release those sex
tapes that he had made of me. So they
did talk about their fear of
consequences. Some of those consequences
that they fear was violence. We heard a
lot about that from Cassie and we even
saw it on the hotel videotape that was
broadcast on CNN. That was a central
piece of evidence in the trial that the
jury saw again and again and again. And
the defense's
response was not to deny that it
happened because it was on film, but to
say, "Yes, he beat his girlfriend. He
was violent, but he wasn't a sex
trafficker." Do you think it's possible,
Ben, that the government opened itself
up to criticism for the strategy that it
took in this case? We talked on the show
about how difficult racketeering would
be to prove. And I'm wondering if you
think it's possible that the
government's now vulnerable to critics
who say maybe they shouldn't have
brought those charges. Maybe those more
complex charges muddied their case.
That's possible. I I think they also may
face criticism simply over the sex
trafficking charge. The defense
portrayed the entire case as overreach
and as the government looking to police
behavior in the bedroom is the way that
they would describe it. Their position
was always that this was consensual
sexual activity. The counterpoint is
that it was always going to be a
difficult case for the government to
prove. And after the verdict was
announced, the government released a
statement where they basically defended
their work and they talked about
prosecuting sex crimes requires brave
victims to come forward. And I read that
as a signal to the victims that we're
not giving up on you. Basically saying,
these are really tough cases. We stand
by our strategy and we're still going to
go forward with prosecutions like this.
That's how I read it.
Ben, thank you so much for being here.
Thank you very much, Natalie.
[Music]
After the break, I talked to my
colleague Jodie Caner about what this
case may show about how prosecution of
sexual assault claims has evolved in the
aftermath of Me Too.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Jody, you're one of the reporters who
broke the Harvey Weinstein story that
sparked the Me Too movement. You've been
following his case as it returned to
court in New York for a retrial. You've
also just generally been a student of
sexual assault litigation in the wake of
Me Too. So, I wanted to talk to you to
help interpret this verdict. How are you
thinking about the outcome of this case
and particularly the fact that Combmes
was found not guilty of sex trafficking?
Well, let's start here. These are
intimate crimes, right? They occur
behind closed doors. They are often very
hard to prove. And it's also a premise
of our legal system that we would rather
have a guilty person walking around free
than we would send an innocent person to
prison. So the starting assumption I
think for most sex crime trials is that
it's very hard to convict. But the
question for the legal system in the
wake of the me too movement has been is
it too hard? Is the system so rigid that
it can't recognize reality when a crime
has taken place? Can it not recognize
what is sometimes the messy nature of
these interactions and of women's lives?
Right? One of the central questions that
came in the aftermath of the Me Too
movement seemed to be how are all of
these accusations that have been made in
the public square, how do they translate
to a court of law, right? Like how are
judges and juries going to handle the
complexity and mushiness of cases that
hinge on questions of consent? Totally.
So here's a really messy thing that both
the recent Weinstein trial in New York
and the Diddy trial have in common,
which is that some of the women at the
center of these cases acknowledged
having had somewhat romantic, somewhat
consensual relationships with the
accused. It is so hard for a jury of
strangers to walk into one of these
rooms, take a look at this very private
thing that happened in the past and say,
"Ooh, you know, I can draw a clear line
between, you know, what is consensual
and what is non-consensual here?" Will a
jury decisively,
unanimously
be willing to say, "Yes, this man is
guilty." and in the Diddy case send him
to federal prison for a really long time
based on a relationship that's hard to
parse. That was a problem for
prosecutors in both trials, right? And
in this case, while we don't know
everything that the jury was thinking,
it seems clear that they felt unable to
say definitively these two women didn't
consent to these sexual encounters. like
the jury is saying we're on the outside
looking in deciding if this was
consensual or not. I mean, making that
kind of determination just has to be
difficult, right? It's really difficult.
And part of what prosecutors did in both
cases, is that they used somewhat
creative techniques. Like in the first
Weinstein trial in New York, the one
that was overturned, the prosecutors
brought these other women in who were
kind of pattern witnesses who testified
about Weinstein's behavior towards them.
And it was both very effective in the
courtroom and it was also the reason why
the conviction was overturned by a very
narrow margin because it struck some of
the appallet judges as unfair. There's
like a bedrock principle in the legal
world that you can only be tried for the
thing you're being tried for. Bringing
in some other outside thing is unfair.
That became a problem for prosecutors
with Weinstein. With Diddy, what you see
is this kind of creative prosecution
that involves sex trafficking charges
and racketeering.
Even though in so many ways, what this
looks like is maybe a little more
similar to a domestic violence case. So,
you know, we talked a second ago about
how rigid the system is. This is the
prosecutor's attempt to make the system
a little bit less rigid and find new
ways of saying this behavior is
criminal. But as they're doing that,
what you're telling us is that you kind
of make what could be a straightforward
charge into a much more complex case
that may be harder to prove.
Look, these are both cases about
extremely powerful men who are alleged
to have used their power to victimize
women. And the criminal justice system
doesn't have a straightforward way of
measuring that. And both of these cases
involved the really difficult question
of like what exactly is coercion? And
prosecutors in constructing these much
more elaborate cases which in this
instance included you know racketeering
are trying it seems to illustrate that
power to map it out to show how it works
they say in service of these crimes.
Absolutely. They're trying to bring to
legal life these terrible power dynamics
that the women experienced. And
crucially, they're trying to say that
these power dynamics aren't just
unfortunate, but that they were deployed
in a criminal way. And that's not an
argument we would have seen a generation
or two ago. It isn't that long ago that
prosecutors really would not touch cases
like this that involved consensual sex
because the conventional wisdom among
prosecutors were that juries were just
going to find it too messy. And so
that's why the kind of mixed results of
these two cases are so interesting,
right? The juries did and didn't buy
prosecutors arguments. In the Weinstein
retrial, there are three women at the
center of that trial. With one of them,
Weinstein was declared not guilty. On
another, the jurors couldn't come to
agreement themselves, and that one was a
mistrial. And then on the third, he was
convicted. And then with Diddy, as we
saw, he was convicted on these two kind
of side dish charges that involved
transportation for the purposes of
prostitution. So in both trials, you
sort of get the sense that the message
from the jury is we're not cool about
what happened. There was some
criminality here. there's something
seriously wrong, but we are unwilling to
go with the full force of the charges
either. What do you make of that this
mixed result in this case also in the
Weinstein case? What does that tell you?
It's funny, Natalie. I've spent years
telling people, don't draw broad
conclusions from one legal proceeding.
You can't judge the entire me too
movement based on the performance, you
know, of one jury or the outcome of one
criminal trial. However, I do think when
we take the Weinstein saga and we add
Diddy, we do have a decent barometer of
how people are thinking now, right?
Because there is willingness to
recognize the women's stories and to say
that something was wrong. There is a
desire on the part of prosecutors
to better reflect the reality of what
women have experienced
and yet there's also a lot of debate and
reluctance and you know remember juries
require unonymity. So given all the
currents swirling around me too in these
issues, good luck getting nine people to
agree on them. Right. And Jody, I think
a lot of people are looking at this
result in this case and saying, "Look,
this is a failure for prosecutors. They
didn't get a conviction on their two
biggest charges." And so, I mean, I
wonder if there is a kind of resounding
message there. You know, I wanted to
know the answer to the question you're
asking. So earlier today, I called some
of my most expert sources, former sex
crimes prosecutors who track this stuff
very closely. And what they said is that
for prosecutors, they don't see this as
an abject loss. They are so happy that
prosecutors brought this case in the
first place. See it as a sign of
progress and a kind of testing because
prosecutors don't know what will work
until they actually discover in court
what will work. The question now given
these mixed results is what cues do the
prosecutors take from this? Do they say
oh there is a little room to work here?
Things have changed. Juries are more
willing to believe very complicated
stories told by women. Or do they look
at these results and say, "These
prosecutors went too far.
[Music]
Jodie, thanks so much, Natalie. Great to
be with you.
[Music]
On Wednesday evening, the judge
presiding over the Shaun Comolmes case
denied the music mogul bail, citing his
history of domestic violence.
Combmes will remain in federal custody
until his sentencing. He faces a maximum
sentence of 20 years for his two guilty
charges.
[Music]
[Laughter]
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday night, House Republicans
were locked in tense negotiations over
the fate of President Trump's sweeping
domestic policy bill.
Conservative Republicans have complained
that the bill doesn't make deep enough
cuts to federal spending, while moderate
Republicans fear it makes too many cuts
to the country's social safety net.
Trump can only afford for three House
Republicans to vote against the bill.
And he spent much of the day trying to
persuade them to back the legislation.
White House officials predict that the
bill will pass as soon as today.
And new data shows that the number of
migrants crossing into the US from
Mexico has dropped to the lowest level
in decades. The decrease highlights just
how much President Trump's hardline
immigration policies are discouraging
people from entering the US. Monthly
arrests by Border Patrol agents peaked
at nearly 250,000 during the presidency
of Joe Biden. They plunged to just 6,000
arrests last month.
Today's episode was produced by Nina
Feldman, Michael Simon Johnson, Alex
Stern, and Claire Tennis Getter. It was
edited by Brendan Clinkenberg and Mike
Benois. Fact checked by Susan Lee.
Contains original music by Sophia Lanman
and Pat McCusker. And was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]